What was the to have that we use to go in the past?
Aber good.
How would you say I have cancelled?
I have cancelled
E cancelado.
Good.
And we said that the version of the verb that you get after haber, you can use it.
like an adjective as well in Spanish just as we do in English.
For example in English we could say it's cancelled.
We use the same version canceled that comes after aber.
So we can do the same in Spanish
So how would you say it is cancelled?
And I remind you that the adjectives that we form in this way tend to go with a star, only with a few exceptions that are more flexible.
So it is cancelled
Está cancelado.
What if we meant la fiesta, the party?
Está cancelada.
Good.
Fiesta, by the way, is actually related to festival, festivity.
We can see the E splitting between festival and fiesta.
To complicate in Spanish.
What's complication?
Complicacion complicar.
Complicar with folding.
Complicar, good.
If you want to say it has got complicated, it has got complicated, how do you think you will say it?
Se ha complicado.
Good.
It has got complicated.
It has complicated itself, we would say.
Very good.
So the adjective complicated is
Complicado.
Good.
So you can say it is complicated.
Es complicado.
Está complicado.
Actually with this one you can use either.
There's to be a tendency to go with a estar with these types of adjectives, but with complicado you could say either.
Es complicado, está complicado, depending on what you are talking about.
You might feel more drawn to one or to the other, but most of the time they're gonna be interchangeable here.
We can also make structures like
Should have, could have, with this aber.
Let's start with should have.
Now should we take it from the verb to all, which also we use like must
And it's related to English debt.
Deber.
Deber, de bear.
Good.
So deber is to owe or must.
And if you say would all, you get should.
So how would you say I should?
Good.
So now we can say I should have cancelled.
And this have is to have.
I should to have cancelled.
Very good.
I should have cancelled.
I should have cancelled it.
Lo deberia haber cancelado.
Very good.
Lo debería haber cancelado.
Where else could that lo go there?
It's uh it's after the unchanged verb.
So deberia haber lo cancelado.
Yeah, deberia haberlo cancelado.
Very good
What was could?
So we take to be able and we say would be able to get this could, this could that refers to future.
So what is to be able related to power
Poder.
Poder, good.
So how would you say I would be able or I could?
Podería
Okay.
Podria.
Podría.
So you could say something like, I could have gone.
I could have gone.
What was to go?
Ir.
And what was gone, the version of to go after Aber?
A ido.
I could have gone.
Podria haber ido.
Ah, podria haber ido.
We could have gone.
Podriamos haber ido.
Good.
So after Aber, any version of Aber, whether it's the two form
Aber whether it's a briya, any version of Aber is gonna have Ado or Ido with the following verb.
But some verbs are irregular and they don't form their version after Aber in this way
So to break, related to rupture in English, was romper.
Now this after aber is not rompido.
The rompido doesn't exist.
It's irregular.
After a bear it's roto.
R-O-T-O roto.
So how would you say I have broken it?
Lo E Roto.
Good.
Lo E roto.
I have broken them
Los he roto.
Good.
What if you want to say it has broken?
It has broken
Se aroto.
Se arto.
It has broken itself.
It has broken.
Very good.
If you had just said a roto
I would understand he, she, it or you formal has or have broken and I would be waiting to hear what was broken.
So we have roto instead of rombillo, let's say.
Roto is the version of romber after aber, which means it will also count for the adjective.
So if you want to say it is broken, how would you say it?
Esta romp roto.
Esta roto.
And if it was a feminine thing?
Esta rota.
To die is morir.
Morir
Morir.
And the version of Tuaber is not morido, it's muerto.
Muerto.
How would you say he has died?
A muerto.
And with morir you can hear it with se or without se.
There's not really a lot of difference.
Sometimes the se doesn't actually make a lot of difference.
A muerto, se ha muerto, you hear both.
Now if you want to say he is dead, how do you think you would say it?
You mean as if it's a star or ser.
We know that this
type of adjective tends to go with well a star but I could see why this specific one could also go with ser and
Certain circumstances.
But it doesn't.
It never goes with ser.
So some of these adjectives we form in this way can go with ser, but this one can't.
So firstly how would that be?
He is dead.
Está muerto.
So complicated, for example, could go with Sir Endestar, but muerto can't.
Maybe it's not just because they are this type of adjective that dead will go with a star.
Maybe it is about the way Spanish perceives the world.
To be that is a state that the soul goes through, let's say.
You don't know what is the the perception behind that or if it's just going with a star because it's one of these adjectives.
So they're interesting points
To think about and thinking about those points had your memory.
Even if you're just looking out of interest and not coming to any conclusions
How would you say I'm dead?
And you can use this to mean tired.
This is uh quite common in Spanish.
If you're really tired you can say, oh I'm dead
Yes, feminine.
Estoy muerta.
Good.
You can say also I die myself.
here like m morir se in all different kinds of circumstances when something's really funny when you can't believe something
In many different circumstances you could use that, you'll hear it around.
But let's build it, let's see how it would sound.
So to die, morir, I die myself, making this reflexive structure.
How would it sound?
It's irregular, so the mue is going to come in.
Muero, maybe.
Yes, yes.
Memuero?
Memuero, good.
Me muero.
So you will hear this all the time at Chinese Spanish.
Ay me muero.
Maybe from embarrassment, maybe from laughter, maybe from disbelief.
It's a common thing, Memuero.
To open in Spanish is abrir.
Abrir.
And if you want to say, I have opened it
You say lo e abierto.
So we don't have abrido after abero we have abierto.
Another irregular one.
Lo e abierto.
Is it with an H
No.
Good question though.
Good that you're thinking about that.
Abrir is A-B-R-I-R.
Abrir becomes abierto.
So how would you say it is open?
How would you say they are open?
Están abierto.
Están abiertos.
Good.
Desir and aser, to say or to tell, desir and to make or to do, asser.
Also are irregular after a ber.
These two verbs are quite irregular in most places.
We will pay them a little more attention later
So desir to say or to tell and aser to do and to make are irregular after aber.
Desir becomes dicho, dicho, and aser becomes
which is why they're nice to see together because they both have this ch sound.
The sir becomes dicho and asir becomes echo.
So how would you say I have said it?
I have said it.
Lo e dicho.
Good.
And what if you wanted to say I have told him
But what we want here is not him.
What we want here is to him.
I have told to him
Le he dicho.
Good.
We have told him.
Le hemos dicho.
Good.
Interestingly, dicho is also a noun.
We said that some version of the verb can form the noun.
Sometimes it's the two form, sometimes it's the I form, sometimes it's the he sheed form.
Here it's this form, un dicho is a saying.
A saying.
Aser after becomes echo.
So how would you say I have done it or I have made it?
Lo echo.
Good.
I should have done it.
I should.
Yes.
Deberia haberlo echo.
Of course we can put the lo there because we have aber in the two form.
Deberia aber lo echo or  deberia aber echo.
Very good.
You should have done it informally.
Good.
How would you say it is done?
It is done.
Está hecho.
Good.
You might also see this used like hecho en China made in China or Echo en España made in Spain.
You will see this on products, should be a nice reminder.
So echo as an adjective made or done.
No?
It is done, it is made.
But it can also be a noun.
Un hecho is a fact.
And it's actually connected to the word fact, even though they look so different.
There is in Spanish and English what we can call a kind of grey area between H's and F's, because in a phonetic change that occurred in Spanish, many F's
became silent H's.
Just as echo is from Aser, Fact is from to do.
So faire, like in French, if you know some French, is to do.
And fact is related to faire just as etcho is related to asser.
And we can find some other connections between this F and this silent H between English and Spanish.
For example, in English we have fable
A fable is a story and the story is spoken and from there we see the relation with ablar, fable, ablar.
We have fugitive
which is the same root as weir, h-u-i-r, huir, which means to escape or to run away in Spanish.
We have hermano or hermana in Spanish, brother or sister, spelled H-E-R-M-A-N-O, or with an A on the end for hermana, and there we see the connection with fraternal.
which means female H E M B R A.
Even within Spanish you can see this phenomenon of the H's and the Fs.
For example, you have iron, which is hierro.
H-I-E-R-A-O.
Hierro Iron.
And then you get ferrocarril, which means railways.
So they look totally unrelated, but if you know that the F became a silent H and that the E split into IE, you can see the connection between hierro and ferrocarril.
You have profundo, profundo, profound in Spanish, as you do in English, and then you have ondo, which means deep.
So ondo is the fundo bit of profundo, but with some changes, ondo, H-O-N-D-O to mean deep.
Fumar means to smoke and then umo h-u-m-o is smoke like a noun el umo, the smoke
So there is some interesting things we can find between English and Spanish and within Spanish itself with these F's and Hs.
Also, you can look out for some connections with other letters.
You will find other pairs of letters like this, for example, W's and G's.
You get war in English and
Guerra in Spanish, William in English, and Guillermo in Spanish.
So this is a an interesting thing to
keep an eye out for to make connections between vocabulary and of course in this way aid your memory